[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> You've probably heard the
expression, as above, so below.
This is a truth that I've
discovered in my own research.
What if you are able to
create an inner experience
in your mind that carries an
amplitude of energy or emotion
that's greater than a
highly-charged emotional
experience in your
past, which could
cause your body to literally
respond to a new mind?
Is it possible that, combining
a clear intention in your mind
with an elevated
emotion in your body,
you can move your brain
and body out of the past
and into a new future?
I realized that
patients that were
able to create an inner
experience that was greater
than their past experiences
were able to change
the future of their bodies.
In a sense, they changed
their genetic destiny.
I'm your host Dr. Joe Dispenza,
and in the previous episode,
we went into depth on the
different types of brainwaves.
In this episode, we're going to
discover the power of your mind
and how it can change
your gene expression.
I want to dispel the
myth around genes
and introduce you to a new
science called epigenetics.
It's my hope that
this information
will help you understand
how to improve
your life from the inside out.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Let's begin with
some simple biology.
Think of your body as a
protein-producing machine.
Muscle cells make
muscle proteins
called actin and myosin.
Skin cells make skin proteins
called collagen and elastin.
Stomach cells make stomach
proteins called enzymes.
Your immune system makes immune
proteins called immunoglobulins
or antibodies.
Your eye cells make eye
proteins called keratin.
And every single cell in your
body, except red blood cells,
make proteins, and the
expression of proteins
is the expression of
life because proteins
are responsible for the
structure and the function
of your body.
In order for a cell
to make proteins,
a gene has to be
stimulated or regulated.
So what are genes then?
Think about genes as a
library of potentials.
And so there was a myth after
the human genome was discovered
that genes create disease.
But if you study the
research, less than 1%
of people on the planet are
born with genetic conditions,
early onset genetic conditions
like Tay-Sachs disease,
sickle cell anemia,
type 1 diabetes.
The other 99% is created
from lifestyle, behavior,
and choices.
So in order for a cell
to make a protein,
a gene has to be regulated.
So then, if you understand then
that genes don't create disease
and the expression of proteins
comes from genes being
regulated, then what
is causing genes
to become regulated
or stimulated?
Well, the latest
research in the field
called epigenetics says that
genes don't create disease.
It's the environment that
signals the gene that
begins to create disease.
But it begs the question, how
can two factory workers working
side by side, both exposed
to the same carcinogenic
chemical-- one gets cancer
and the other doesn't.
Surely there must be some
internal order in that person's
body that's greater
than the conditions
in their environment.
And in a sense then, the
inner environment of the body
is still the outer
environment of the cell.
So then it's not genes
that create disease,
it's our reaction
to the environment
or, better yet, how we begin
to look at the environment that
influences our emotional state.
And it's our emotions
then that have
a key factor in sending signals
to cause genes to upregulate
or what we call downregulate.
Now, genes are like
Christmas tree lights.
They're turning on
and off all the time.
But in a sense, they're
not turning on and off.
They're getting
regulated or they're
getting instructions
from the environment
outside of the cell.
And when they get the
proper instructions,
when the gene gets upregulated,
it makes a healthy protein.
When the cell is
getting information
that causes it to
contract or limit
its metabolic productions,
it begins to downregulate
and it starts making
a cheaper protein.
So then, if the
environment signals
the gene and the end
product of an experience
in your environment
is called an emotion,
is it possible then that you
can signal the gene ahead
of the environment?
We learned in previous
episodes that the stronger
the emotion that you feel from
some experience in your life,
the more altered you
feel inside of you,
the more you narrow
your focus on the cause.
And the brain freezes the image,
and that's called the memory.
And we said that people
think neurologically
within the circuits of
those past experiences,
and they think chemically
within the boundaries
of those emotions.
And how you think
and how you feel
creates your state of being.
So in a sense, highly
charged emotional events
can possibly signal
genes that begin
to cause the body to change.
So then, if a person is
waking up every morning
and searching for
the familiar feeling
that they call
themselves, the moment
they get in touch with
that feeling that's
familiar to them--
and those feelings are
influencing their thoughts,
and those thoughts are creating
more of the same chemicals that
create the same feelings.
Then if they're living
by the same emotion,
it makes sense
they're stimulating
the same genes in the
same way every single day,
and now they're headed
for a genetic destiny
because there's no
new information coming
from the environment that
could possibly begin to select
or instruct new genes.
And in fact, if you look
at two identical twins both
sharing the same genome,
why is it that one dies
at 54 and the other dies at 86?
Obviously it's their interaction
in the environment, the choices
that they make, the behaviors
that they demonstrate,
how they respond to stress,
how resilient they are
to return back to homeostasis.
And in fact, it's
their interaction
in the environment that's
selecting and instructing
gene expression.
Now think about this.
When they began to
map the human genome,
they said, OK, the body makes
about 100,000 proteins, which
means there should
be 100,000 genes
for each one of those proteins.
We have 40 genes that are
called regulatory proteins
or regulatory genes that assist
in making those proteins.
So now 100,000 plus 40,000
makes 140,000 proteins,
and there should
be 140,000 genes.
But when they mapped
the human genome,
they found out that
we only express
as human beings 23,688 genes.
So then how is it
possible then that we
have more proteins that
make up our body than we
have genes to make them?
Because on one
single gene, there
can be thousands of
different variations
that begin to cause the
cell to begin to make
different types of proteins.
So then the
expression of proteins
is the expression of life.
And so if people are
living in the routine
of the predictable
future or they're
memorized to emotions
of their past
and they can't think or act
greater than how they feel,
then those series of
events in their lives
has began to influence
their gene expression.
Then once the gene
has been signaled
and the person is
constantly living out
of homeostasis or
balance, that imbalance
becomes their new balance.
And now the internal
environment of their body
is sending specific
signals to the cells,
and the cells are getting
the same instructions.
And the same instructions
produce the same proteins,
and now the person begins
to experience ill health
or disease.
So I became very
interested in this topic
because I started reading
research where scientists
were taking people that
had type 2 diabetes
and exposing them to
an hour of comedy.
And when they rated
the comedy show,
many of the participants
rated the show, on a scale
of one to five, a five, which
means, for a whole entire hour,
they laughed.
But what they were measuring
before and after the comedy
show caught my
attention because they
were measuring gene
expression to see
if changing their emotional
state was able to, in one hour,
select and instruct new genes.
And in fact, over 20 genes
were upregulated just
by people changing their mood.
So by changing their
internal state,
they were able to
select and instruct
new genes that
made new proteins.
People began to function with
diabetes within a normal range
or slightly elevated
blood sugar levels
compared to where
their blood sugar
levels were every single day.
So it caused me to think, OK, if
I could take a group of people
and measure their gene
expression and, for four days,
ask them to think differently,
to make different choices,
to have new experiences, and to
elevate their emotional state,
would it be possible
that, in four days,
they can begin to change
their gene expression?
So we selected 32 people
in a randomized study.
We did some tests to
take some cells out
of the inside of their mouth.
And we wanted to do measurements
before they started a workshop,
and then we wanted to
take another measurement
to begin to see if
there was a change.
And we were measuring 7,500
different gene expressions.
That meant that, when they
stepped outside of routine,
when they traded certain
emotions for elevated emotions,
by beginning to change
their inner state
would they be able to signal the
gene ahead of the environment?
Now, what we found was
that, in four days,
the gene that makes
new neurons in response
to learning and novel
experiences was activated.
The gene for cellular
repair that stimulated
stem cells, those
transitional cells that
go to damaged tissues and
repair them, was activated,
so there was regeneration
going on in the body.
The gene for
oxidative stress was
upregulated so the
body could move back
into normal health and balance.
And antioxidants, anticancer,
anti-aging, anti-heart disease,
anti-stroke,
anti-neurodegenerative,
anti-inflammatory,
anti-microbial--
that gene was signaled.
The gene to build
cellular structures,
the cytoskeleton of the cell,
was activated, more integrity,
more regeneration in the cell.
Three genes were activated
that began to suppress
cancer growth in tumors.
And the genes for hormonal
balance, metabolic function,
and metabolic order were all
stimulated within four days,
eight genes upregulated.
These are all the genes that
were activated or upregulated
within just four days.
So it makes sense then, you're
not doomed by your genes,
that you are your
own genetic engineer.
So in our workshops
around the world,
we see many people reverse
very serious health conditions
like Parkinson's disease
or MS or lupus or even rare
genetic disorders that
medical science really
has no solution for.
So in order for me to understand
how that was possible,
by studying gene
expression, we now
know then that, when
people begin to heal,
they're upregulating
new genes and they're
downregulating genes
that have to do
with disease or imbalance.
So then I started
thinking, is it possible,
by teaching people how to
self-regulate and begin
to change their inner state,
could it lengthen their life
in some way?
Is it possible that meditation
or contemplative practices
on a daily basis could
influence a person's future
by adding days to their life?
So we did another
study, and that study
was in Palm Springs,
California in 2017.
And what we did is we
randomly selected 32 people,
and then we asked
these 32 people
to commit for five
days out of a week
doing some type of meditation
for at least 60 days.
But all we wanted them to do
is to begin to self-regulate
and change their inner state.
Now, what we were looking
to measure were telomeres.
Now, telomeres are the
tiny little shoestrings
on the end of your DNA.
And every time a cell divides,
and cells divide about 50 to 75
times, the cell
begins to shave off
a little bit of that shoestring.
Now, stress and the
hormones of stress
actually accelerate the
degeneration of the telomeres
and the length of
those telomeres.
So you can determine a
person's biological age,
which may be in
complete contrast
to their chronological age.
So we wanted to see
then, is it possible
that telomeres could
actually lengthen
and a person could
lengthen their life
or extend their
life in some way?
So what we found was five
people discontinued doing
the meditations, which left 27.
20 out of 27 people lengthened
their telomeres, which
is about 74% of the study.
11 out of the 27 people
increased their telomeres
by more than 0.05%.
That's 40% of the
people in the study,
and that adds about four
to eight days of their life
if they live to at least 75.
Six out of the 27
people significantly
increased their telomeres
between 0.1% and 0.26%.
That's 22% of the
people involved
in the study lengthened their
life between eight to 16 days.
Now check this out.
One person in the study
increased their telomere length
within four days.
Now, I understand that
telomeres take time to grow.
They're like
fingernails or hair.
And studies that have
been done out of UCLA
have shown that men
with prostatic cancer
or at least early
onset gene expression
of possible prostatic
cancer, that in 60 days,
they were able to upregulate
new genes for health
and downregulate those
genes for disease.
And at the same time, they began
to lengthen their telomeres.
So when I talked to
the scientists involved
in the study, I
said to them, I'm
aware that telomeres
take time to lengthen,
but we're seeing
in our workshops
that people are
having instantaneous
change in their health
during a meditation.
In other words,
in some way, we're
seeing an instantaneous change.
And everything in
three-dimensional reality,
for something to happen
usually takes time.
But if it's energy
influencing matter
and it's happening in an instant
and it's not time-dependent,
that energy or the quantum
is influencing matter,
is it possible then
that someone could
change their telomere
expression within four days
if it's a quantum phenomenon?
Well, the scientists
paused for about a minute
and finally said,
theoretically, it's possible,
and if one person was able to
do it, I would be impressed.
And I said, that's all I need.
And we had one person able
to significantly change
their telomere length
within four days,
and that is a
quantum phenomenon.
So in a sense, we
made history to prove
that you can lengthen
your life by changing
your internal state.
So how do we change
gene expression?
When people have highly
charged emotional experiences
and it begins to change
their emotional state
and it changes their
brain structure,
it changes the mapping
of their brain,
how is it possible
then that they
can begin to select
and instruct new genes
and to change their health?
Well, when you have an internal
experience in your mind
that carries an amplitude
of energy that's
greater than the hardwired
programs in your brain
and the emotional
conditioning in your body,
you will become
biologically changed.
Here's a person going along
living their normal life,
and all of a sudden, they
have a highly charged
emotional experience.
That experience then
wires and enriches
the circuits in
their brain, and it
begins to send the chemical
emotional signal to their body.
And it's that chemical
emotional signature
to the body that
begins to change
the person's state of being.
Why?
Because we could say their body
and brain are now in the past,
and that event has
changed them biologically.
So how are they going to change
the biology of their circuitry,
their neurochemistry, their
hormone expression, and even
their gene expression?
What happens for
most people is they
begin to create beliefs
about themselves
and their lives from
past experiences.
They are the thoughts
neurologically
and the feelings chemically
that they embrace
within the biology of
their past experiences
which ultimately becomes
their state of being,
because how you think
and how you feel
creates your state of being.
So then when a person
has an inner experience
in the present moment that
carries an amplitude of energy
or the emotion
inwardly is greater
than the shock or the
betrayal from the past,
it makes sense then, when the
emotional quotient is greater
than the past
experience, it's going
to begin to rewire the brain and
send a new emotional signature
beginning to condition the
body in that present moment
to a new mind.
And we could say then,
your biology literally
changes or, better yet,
the past no longer exists.
Now I want to tell a story
to be able to bring this
all together.
We had a 72-year-old woman
come to a week-long event
in Vancouver, British
Columbia, and this woman
was diagnosed with
Parkinson's disease.
And Parkinson's
disease is a deficiency
in dopamine in the brain.
And when there's not enough
dopamine in the brain, all
of a sudden, the upper
motor neurons in the brain
can't communicate very well
with each other, and the effect,
it begins to produce
involuntary tremors
and this type of paralysis
called spastic paralysis.
You see a limitation
in motor function,
or when a person
tries to move, they
have these involuntary tremors.
Try as they may to control
it with their conscious mind,
they can't.
And in fact, a lot of times when
they get anxious or nervous,
their tremors or their
condition amplifies.
Now, that is a gene that
has been downregulated.
So then this woman,
in one meditation,
had one inner experience that
literally was so profound,
it was so elevated that, when
she came back to her senses,
she literally began to
express different proteins.
In a sense, she changed
her body by thought alone.
And so we brought
her onto the stage,
and her condition
before this event
was that she couldn't swallow.
She couldn't chew her food.
She had saliva constantly
running off of her mouth.
She had to consistently
use a tissue,
and she couldn't stand up.
After that one inner event that
carried an amplitude of energy
that was greater than the
hardwired programs in her brain
and the normal
emotional feelings
that she felt on
a daily basis, we
could say that, in
that moment, genes
began to become upregulated
and new information was
coming into her body.
She stood on the
stage and she said,
after all these years,
all the therapies, all
the different drugs, all the
different surgeries that I had,
nothing seemed to
change this condition,
and now I can speak better.
I can chew my food.
I can blow my nose.
I can swallow.
And for the audience, she
sat down and then stood up.
And she literally had
a significant change
in gene expression, and it
happened in one instant.
Now, by the same
means, there are
people that have had
abusive childhoods
with alcoholic
parents where they
were abused every single day
when their father came home
from work, and it
wasn't just one event.
It was a series of
several events over time
that began to
select and instruct
genes that caused them to
have a rare genetic condition.
Now, in this case, this person,
it took them almost two years
to literally consistently
knock on the genetic door
and break out of the patterns
of their normal thinking
and the way they typically felt.
In other words,
every single day,
they understood that they were
their own genetic engineer.
And every single day,
they were working
on going from the old
self to the new self.
And of course, life
isn't that linear.
They had their
own stress events.
They had their own difficulties.
They had their own
financial problems.
They had family dynamics.
And because they were living
life, it took them more time.
But every day, they were
shaving down a little bit more
of those emotions from
the past and learning
how to elevate their
emotional state.
And they were practicing
every single day,
combining a clear intention
with an elevated emotion
and moving into a
new state of being.
Now, this person's health
condition was very limited.
They had the very scaffolding
and the structure of their bones
were degenerating where
they had numerous fractures,
and the doctors told them
there was no solution
for this genetic condition.
But if you understand then,
if the scaffolding of bones
is made of proteins and
that you could actually
begin to upregulate those
genes, every single day,
she was knocking on
that genetic door
and shaving down
that emotional state
and changing her thoughts and
feelings that, in two years,
she reached the
point in her life
where she was so in love with
herself, so in love with life,
so grateful to be alive that
she no longer cared if she even
had the condition any longer.
She went to the hospital.
They did the urine samples to
determine if the disease was
still present, and she
got the call the next day
that the gene was
literally upregulated
and her condition
was back to normal.
Now this person to
this day still has
the change in her health.
Now, when she stood on the
stage and told the story
to the audience,
there was a woman
in the audience with the
same rare genetic condition.
And she looked at that person
and said, if she could do it,
I can do it.
And this woman reversed the
same rare genetic juvenile onset
condition within three months.
In other words, the
person who had the healing
broke the four-minute
mile and it
made it easier for the
next person to do the same.
And that's exactly what
starts to happen in this work.
I believe that health
and wellness can become
as infectious as disease.
Now that I've shown you the
supernatural ability of how
your genes can be
reprogrammed, how
can we use this information
to heal your body by thought
alone.
In fact, what's the
next level for you?
In the next episode, I
want to ask the question,
if in double blind and triple
blind placebo studies where
subjects respond to a sugar pill
and the changes result from 10%
all the way up to
100%, do you really
need a sugar pill begin
to heal your body?
In other words, is it possible
to heal your body by thought
alone?
I'm your host Dr. Joe
Dispenza for "Rewired,"
and I hope to see you
in the next episode
where we go beyond the ordinary
into the extraordinary.
[MUSIC PLAYING]